---
layout: post
title: "Choosing an Instrument"
author: "Rob Gillan"
categories: beginners
tags: [beginner, new, instrument, choose, choosing]
img: playing-cello.png
---
<p>There is no perfect way to choose an instrument. However, that doesn't mean it can't be a fun and relatively easy process. Choosing an instrument involves answering a few questions about your motivation. Do you want to learn an instrument to join a school or community concert band? Do you want to rock out with your friends in your basement? Maybe you feel like you've got music inside of you just begging to be written.</p>
<p><i>Disclaimer: Unless you absolutely know what you want to play (in which case why are you reading this - go play!) you will probably want to involve a professional. Having the teacher, conductor, or a professional sales associate at your local music store is a great way to figure out which instrument fits you best. Don't ever be nervous to ask questions about an instrument. The world's greatest musicians all had the awkward days, weeks, and months that you may experience. Everyone started somewhere! A good teacher, salesperson, or musician should be happy to answer the most trivial of questions for a beginner. If you encounter someone who scoffs at you, move along. That's their attitude problem - not yours.</i></p>
<p>Now, on to the fun stuff. First and foremost: do you want to play a percussive instrument like the drums or would you prefer to rock out in another section with a brass, string, or woodwind instrument? If keeping rhythm captures your interest, try visiting the drum department of your local music store and have a seat at a drum kit. Does it seem enthralling? Maybe the acrobatic (and somewhat loud) world of drums is for you! If a full drum kit isn't right, have a look around at the wonderful world of percussive instruments from tambourines to glockenspiels. We've all used the word xylophone before (it's a fun word), but have you ever played one? Give it a shot! Just remember - saying that you "have no sense of rhythm" doesn't really mean that you have no sense of rhythm. Playing <i>any</i> instrument requires learning new movements and coordination which can (and likely will) feel awkward at first.</p>
<p>If percussion isn't your thing then ask yourself a bit about what other instruments you enjoy the sounds of when listening to music. You should <i>love</i> the sound your instrument makes - after all, you'll be spending a lot of time with it! Instruments come in all shapes and sizes, which is fine for the majority of us. If you are somewhat short or petite then you may find it difficult lugging around and playing a bass saxophone. Conversely, if you're seven feet tall then a piccolo or fife might feel a little funny in your hands. BUT (and this is a big but) - in the end that doesn't really matter. When I hear people talk about having fingers that are "too fat" or "too short" or "not strong enough" I want to throw my hands in the air and say, "Did you think I was born with the ability to play?" Of course, I don't throw my hands up in the air because that would seem excessive in most situations, but the point is that you shouldn't worry about your finger size or strength. The dexterity, coordination, and fine muscle strength that all good musicians have is a result of repeated practice and playing of their instruments. Just as you shouldn't expect to compete with Tiger Woods the first time you pick up a set of golf clubs, so should your expectations be set when learning a new instrument.</p>
<p>At the end of the day, simply pick an instrument that feels comfortable to you and that you love the sound of. Few people have ever sat down at a piano and let their fingers fly while actually playing something that sounded good, so trust your gut and find your niche in the world. As many musicians can attest, choosing an instrument is often the beginning of a longer journey that involves learning to play other instruments. And as we demonstrate in the world of PitchPlay, the language of music is universal, so if you fall out of love with your first (or second, or third) choice then simply try a new instrument and solider on. The musical experience you gain (sight reading, ear training, theory) will be leverageable in all of your musical pursuits.</p>
<p>Finally - getting that instrument home is step one. Steps two and beyond will require ﻿<a href="/practice/GuidingPractice/">practice, discipline, and some hard work</a>, but they will lead you down the road to a life made richer by the music you've added to it.</p>
